---
layout: cv
---

table(key-value).
|_. Name |Christopher Floess|
|_. Born |04.07.1978|
|_. Current | Web Developer|
|_. Education	|Bachelor of Arts German Studies, Minor: Computer Science|
|_. Citizenship |German/American Dual Citizenship|
|_. Contact|+49.0176.77307255 or chris.floess@gmail.com|

h2. Experience

table(key-value).
|_. 2015 |_mindmatters GmbH_ - Worked on first Electron project with React.js and ES6.|
|_. 2015 |_mindmatters GmbH_ - Devops from scratch: continuing work started in 2012, helped to further automate provisioning of servers on legacy systems. Migrated Chef configurations to system-installable packages (RPMs).|
|_. 2013 - 2015 |_mindmatters GmbH_ - Worked on the development of a single-page Rails application with Backbone.js/Marionette.js. Furthered devops skills with Puppet for production systems. Helped introduce Docker as the core component of our testing infrastructure.|
|_. 2012 - 2013 |_mindmatters GmbH_ - More devops work helping to migrate server management of a Rails project to Chef.|
|_. 2011 - 2012 |_Propertybase GmbH_ - Introduced Backbone.js to a Rails project for better client-side code structure.|
|_. 2009 - 2011 |_advaBusiness Software GmbH_ - First contact with devops concepts. Introduced Puppet server management to automate the maintenance of our Rails application stack.|
|_. 2005 - 2009|The University of Arizona University Bookstores - Supervisor for Special Events|
|_. 2002 - 2005|OfficeMax Copy Center - Production Supervisor|
|_. 2000 - 2002|Publix Supermarkets - Responsible for receiving, ordering, and inventory of the frozen food department|
|_. 1997 - 2000|Petsmart, Inc. - Receiver|

h2. Academic Background

table(key-value).
|_. 2015 - |coursera.org, Johns Hopkins Data Science Track|
|_. 2005 - 2010 |University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona, USA – Major: German Studies, Minor: Computer Science|
|_. 2003 - 2005 |Pima Community College, Tucson, Arizona, USA – Welding Technology|
|_. 2002 - 2003 |University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona, USA – Major, Mathematics|
|_. 1999 - 2002 |Santa Fe Community College, Gainesville, Florida, USA|
|_. 1997 - 1998 |Brevard Community College, Melbourne, Florida, USA|

h2. Academic Achievements and Acknowledgments

(cv-section)*(cv-section-entry) Charles Polzer, S. J., Grant for contributing to the translation of letters of the Swiss missionary Phillipp Segesser
*(cv-section-entry) Participant in the STORK research project for secure package management – www.cs.arizona.edu/stork/packagemanagersecurity

h2. Extracurricular

table(key-value).
|_. 2015 |Coached in Hamburg's second Students on Rails event|
|_. 2013 |Coached in Hamburg's first Students on Rails event aimed at introducing university students to Agile web development with Rails|
|_. 2012 |Co-founder Rubyshift Ruby user group in Munich|

h2. Languages

(cv-section)*(cv-section-entry) English (native)
*(cv-section-entry) German

h2. Professional Interests

(cv-section)*(cv-section-entry) Lisp
*(cv-section-entry) Functional programming
*(cv-section-entry) R
*(cv-section-entry) Statistics and data mining
*(cv-section-entry) Virtualization with linux containers and docker
*(cv-section-entry) Privacy on the Internet

h2. Open Source

(cv-section)*(cv-section-entry) Simple terminal based password manager https://github.com/flooose/password-utility
*(cv-section-entry) A simple android client for runkeeper.com https://github.com/flooose/gpxkept

h2. Process

(cv-section)*(cv-section-entry) Scrum/Agile
*(cv-section-entry) Test driven design and development
*(cv-section-entry) Behavior-driven outside-in development (Cucumber)

h2. Hobbies

(cv-section)*(cv-section-entry) Running
*(cv-section-entry) Surfing
*(cv-section-entry) Bicycles
*(cv-section-entry) Outdoors

h2. Summary of Technologies

(cv-section)*(cv-section-entry) Languages / Frameworks
** Ruby 1.8.x – current
** Rails 2.3.5 – current
** ES6 / JavaScript / CoffeeScript
** Backbone.js / Marionette.js
** React.js
** Electron platform
** HTML5 / CSS3
** Puppet server management framework
** Chef  server management framework
** Docker container virtualization
** R
** Java (limited)
*(cv-section-entry) Databases
** MySQL
** Postgresql
** SQL Server
*(cv-section-entry) Operating Systems
** Linux / FreeBSD – 10 Years
** OSX
