---
title: "Jasmine, Backbone and Rails: grappling with the basics."
layout: post
published: false
---
h2. Jasmine, Backbone and Rails: grappling with the basics.

In my previous
"post":http://flooose.github.com/2011/11/11/setting-up-jasmine-and-backbone-js-in-rails-3.1.html
I covered some of the difficulties I encountered in setting up
Backbone with Rails and in turn Jasmine with both of of them.

I've spent some time with this since then, well actually a lot of
time, thinking mainly.

The idea was to do all of my development test driven, just like the
"article":http://tinnedfruit.com/2011/03/25/testing-backbone-apps-with-jasmine-sinon-2.html
that I used as a reference point. At some point, I realized that all
of this stuff is just too new for me. Only allowing myself to advance
test-driven was keeping me from advancing at all because I didn't have
the conceptual prerequisites to know what to test.

One such point of missing know-how was the idea of views and
templates, how they worked, did they work with ruby, was there going
to be a need to mix ruby and javascript templates, etc. All of this
will be addressed today. I'm going to throw together some
proof-of-concept code and then retroactively follow up with testing
afterwards.

So, now a bit of background. After the last post, I had really not
gotten that far. I was developing a school registration program and
had really just set up the testing environment and a Student model.

In order to get a feel for how views work, I'm going to define one
that gets loaded and sent along when someone opens the landing page of
the application. It will be bound to a link and then displayed when
that link gets clicked.

