---
title: Thoughts on Hacking
layout: post-03102012
published: false
---
h1. Thoughts on Hacking

Most of the developers I know, would also consider themselves hackers. I'm a hacker. It's one of the things I'm surest about in life. What I've never been sure of is if I'm cut out to be a developer.

I've always had a certain anxiety about developing things. There are decisions to be made about the level and type of abstraction and these decisions are influenced about the nature of the problem as well as the nature of the ecosystem in which the implementation of the solution takes place, i.e. how other problems in the ecosystem were solve.

Here things quickly get fuzzy and are determined by things like the personalities of the other developers with whom you work, the type of organization in which the team works, or the wishes of the customer for whom the solution is being implemented. The list really is endless and the uncertainty therein is what gives me my anxiety about development.

Hacking on the other hand is less about building and more about dissecting. I'm constantly hacking and there is never a sense of anxiety. I've thought a lot about this and I think it has to do with the fact that the solution doesn't matter. The hack is the solution. You take something apart, and that's the solution. Doing something with the pieces is arbitrary and secondary.

Most of the things we hack aren't even existing programs, but rather concepts like programming paradigms or command-line acrobatics or ideas about automation, or you name, but it's all about taking things apart, not building things.